docs/guide.md, before:

# AegisFlow Field Guide

Welcome—this guide is designed to walk you through *every* AegisFlow feature using the same clarity you would expect in an IELTS-style explanation: we describe the concept, illustrate the flow, and then tell you how to act on it.

---

## 1. Mental Model: From Sensor to Sink

Before writing a single line of code, picture the journey your telemetry takes:

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': {'background': 'transparent', 'primaryColor': '#f6f8fa', 'primaryBorderColor': '#57606a', 'primaryTextColor': '#24292f', 'lineColor': '#57606a', 'secondaryColor': '#d0d7de'}}}%%
flowchart LR
    OPCUA["Collector<br/>OPC UA / MQTT / etc."] --> WAL["Write-Ahead Log"]
    WAL --> Queue["Bounded Queue"]
    Queue --> Transformer["Transformer Hook"]
    Transformer --> Sink["Sink · Timescale / Callback / Channel"]
    Sink --> Dest["Any DB / API"]
```

Every feature you will see maps directly onto one of these stages.

---

## 2. Configuration: Teaching AegisFlow About Your Plant

**What it is:** YAML that describes backpressure policies, OPC UA endpoints, Timescale credentials, metrics, and WAL paths (`data/config.yaml`).

**Why it matters:** It lets you swap PLC nodes, durability limits, or database tables without recompiling.

**How to use:**

```yaml
policy:
  max_queue_len: 100000
  on_queue_full: block

opcua:
  endpoint: opc.tcp://plc:4840
  nodes:
    - node_id: "ns=2;s=Temp.Sensor"
      sensor_id: temp_sensor

timescale:
  conn_string: "postgres://user:pass@localhost:5432/aegis?sslmode=disable"
```

```go
cfg, err := aegisflow.LoadConfig("data/config.yaml")
// cfg is ready to feed into any runtime or flow
```

IELTS-style tip: always mention *where* and *why*. When briefing teammates, say “Update `data/config.yaml` to add the new PLC node” so they know the exact file and intent.

---

## 3. Flow Builder: Conf → StreamIN → StreamOUT

**What it is:** A fluent API in `pkg/aegisflow/flow.go` that lets you describe your pipeline in plain English steps.

**Why it matters:** New adopters can read the code aloud: “configure, stream in via collector X, stream out via sink Y.”

**How to use:**

```go
flow, _ := aegisflow.Conf("./data/config.yaml")

rt, _ := flow.
    StreamIN(
        aegisflow.StreamInCollector(customCollector), // optional
    ).
    StreamOUT(
        aegisflow.StreamOutCallback("printer", printBatch),
    )

ctx, cancel := context.WithCancel(context.Background())
defer cancel()
_ = rt.Run(ctx)
```

You can shrink it further:

```go
_ = flow.StreamIN().Run(ctx, aegisflow.StreamOutSink(timescaleSink))
```

---

## 4. Default Edge Runtime: Industrial Strength Out of the Box

**What it is:** `EdgeRuntime` (`pkg/aegisflow/edge.go`) wires the production-ready OPC UA collector, file WAL, in-memory queue, transformer hook, and Timescale sink.

**Why it matters:** You get guaranteed delivery, WAL replay, and Prometheus metrics the moment you type `go run ./cmd/aegis-edge`.

**How to customize:** pass `EdgeRuntimeOption` values:

```go
rt, _ := aegisflow.NewEdgeRuntime(
    cfg,
    aegisflow.WithCollector(mqttCollector),
    aegisflow.WithSink(customSink),
    aegisflow.WithTransformer(customTransformer),
)
```

---

## 5. Sink Adapters: Bridging to Unknown Databases

When your destination database or API is undecided, use the lightweight adapters in `pkg/aegisflow/sink_adapters.go`.

### Callback Sink

```go
printer := aegisflow.NewCallbackSink("stdout", func(batch []aegisflow.Sample) error {
    for _, s := range batch {
        fmt.Printf("%s %s => %+v\n", s.Timestamp, s.SensorID, s.Values)
    }
    return nil
})

flow.Run(ctx, aegisflow.StreamOutSink(printer))
```

### Channel Sink

```go
chanSink, batches, closeFn := aegisflow.NewChannelSink("fanout", 128)
defer closeFn()

go func() {
    for batch := range batches {
        forwardToFutureDB(batch)
    }
}()

flow.Run(ctx, aegisflow.StreamOutSink(chanSink))
```

Mermaid view:

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': {'background': 'transparent', 'primaryColor': '#f6f8fa', 'primaryBorderColor': '#57606a', 'primaryTextColor': '#24292f', 'lineColor': '#57606a', 'secondaryColor': '#d0d7de'}}}%%
flowchart LR
    Queue["Bounded Queue"] --> ChannelSink["Channel Sink"]
    ChannelSink --> WorkerA["Worker A"]
    ChannelSink --> WorkerB["Worker B"]
```

---

## 6. External Publisher: Bring Your Own Data Source

**What it is:** `ExternalPublisher` (`pkg/aegisflow/external.go`) exposes the WAL → queue → sink durability to *your* producers, even if they are not OPC UA.

```go
pub, _ := aegisflow.NewExternalPublisher(&aegisflow.ExternalPublisherConfig{
    Policy: cfg.Policy,
    WAL:    cfg.WAL,
}, func(batch []aegisflow.Sample) error {
    return sendToKafka(batch)
})

_ = pub.Publish(aegisflow.Sample{
    SensorID:  "custom",
    Timestamp: time.Now(),
    Values:    map[string]float64{"value": 42},
})
```

Use this when you already have a collector but still want WAL durability and backpressure.

---

## 7. Observability & Health

**Metrics:** Every runtime exposes `/metrics` and `/healthz` (see `pkg/aegisflow/edge.go:139-188`). Counters include `aegis_samples_ingested_total`, queue length, WAL size, and ingest latency.

**Custom instrumentation:** Use `StreamInObservability` / `StreamOutObservability` to inject OpenTelemetry or your own logging layer.

```go
flow.StreamIN(
    aegisflow.StreamInObservability(myObs),
).StreamOUT(
    aegisflow.StreamOutObservability(myObs),
)
```

IELTS tip: always mention evidence—tell stakeholders, “Check `/metrics` for `aegis_queue_length` to confirm backpressure behaviour.”

---

## 8. Disaster Readiness: Policies, WAL Replay, DLQ

*Policies:* configure `policy.on_queue_full` / `on_wal_full` to `block`, `drop`, or `reject`.

*Replay:* `replayWALIntoQueue` ensures that after a crash, every uncommitted entry re-enters the queue before new data flows.

*DLQ Hook:* Transformers can return an error; samples then land in the observability DLQ via `RecordDLQ`.

This triad lets you state, “Even if power fails mid-burst, AegisFlow reloads the WAL and the queue resumes without data loss.”

---

## 9. Hands-On Examples

Browse [`example/`](../example/README.md) for runnable scenarios:

1. **Basic** – OPC UA → Timescale (`go run ./example/basic`)
2. **Callback** – OPC UA → custom callback → unknown DB
3. **Channel** – OPC UA → channel sink → multiple workers

Each example is paired with a Mermaid diagram so you can see the architecture before running it.

---

## 10. Next Steps

- Swap the collector with MQTT, Modbus, or file replayers by implementing `aegisflow.Collector`.
- Write a custom `Sink` when your target DB stabilises—use the callback sink as scaffolding.
- Extend observability with `StreamOutObservability` to plug into OpenTelemetry.
- Contribute transformers, DLQs, or config hot-reloaders following the guidelines in `README.md`.

Whenever you introduce AegisFlow to teammates or customers, summarise it like this:

> “Configure once, reuse everywhere: OPC UA feeds a durable WAL, the queue enforces policy, and the sink is whatever database or service we need today—or tomorrow.”

That single sentence keeps everyone aligned with the architecture you just explored.

Commit message:

Enhance CLI functionality and update guide with new commands for runtime management and metrics streaming

docs/guide.md, after:

# AegisFlow Field Guide

Welcome—this guide is designed to walk you through *every* AegisFlow feature using the same clarity you would expect in an IELTS-style explanation: we describe the concept, illustrate the flow, and then tell you how to act on it.

---

## 1. Mental Model: From Sensor to Sink

Before writing a single line of code, picture the journey your telemetry takes:

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': {'background': 'transparent', 'primaryColor': '#f6f8fa', 'primaryBorderColor': '#57606a', 'primaryTextColor': '#24292f', 'lineColor': '#57606a', 'secondaryColor': '#d0d7de'}}}%%
flowchart LR
    OPCUA["Collector<br/>OPC UA / MQTT / etc."] --> WAL["Write-Ahead Log"]
    WAL --> Queue["Bounded Queue"]
    Queue --> Transformer["Transformer Hook"]
    Transformer --> Sink["Sink · Timescale / Callback / Channel"]
    Sink --> Dest["Any DB / API"]
```

Every feature you will see maps directly onto one of these stages.

---

## 2. Configuration: Teaching AegisFlow About Your Plant

**What it is:** YAML that describes backpressure policies, OPC UA endpoints, Timescale credentials, metrics, and WAL paths (`data/config.yaml`).

**Why it matters:** It lets you swap PLC nodes, durability limits, or database tables without recompiling.

**How to use:**

```yaml
policy:
  max_queue_len: 100000
  on_queue_full: block

opcua:
  endpoint: opc.tcp://plc:4840
  nodes:
    - node_id: "ns=2;s=Temp.Sensor"
      sensor_id: temp_sensor

timescale:
  conn_string: "postgres://user:pass@localhost:5432/aegis?sslmode=disable"
```

```go
cfg, err := aegisflow.LoadConfig("data/config.yaml")
// cfg is ready to feed into any runtime or flow
```

IELTS-style tip: always mention *where* and *why*. When briefing teammates, say “Update `data/config.yaml` to add the new PLC node” so they know the exact file and intent.

---

## 3. Flow Builder: Conf → StreamIN → StreamOUT

**What it is:** A fluent API in `pkg/aegisflow/flow.go` that lets you describe your pipeline in plain English steps.

**Why it matters:** New adopters can read the code aloud: “configure, stream in via collector X, stream out via sink Y.”

**How to use:**

```go
flow, _ := aegisflow.Conf("./data/config.yaml")

rt, _ := flow.
    StreamIN(
        aegisflow.StreamInCollector(customCollector), // optional
    ).
    StreamOUT(
        aegisflow.StreamOutCallback("printer", printBatch),
    )

ctx, cancel := context.WithCancel(context.Background())
defer cancel()
_ = rt.Run(ctx)
```

You can shrink it further:

```go
_ = flow.StreamIN().Run(ctx, aegisflow.StreamOutSink(timescaleSink))
```

---

## 4. CLI Shortcuts

Prefer the terminal? Install the CLI (`go install github.com/ghalamif/AegisFlow/cmd/aegis-edge@latest`) and use:

```bash
aegis-edge run -config ./data/config.yaml          # start the runtime
aegis-edge validate -config ./data/config.yaml     # lint your YAML in CI
aegis-edge stats -url http://localhost:9100/metrics -interval 1s  # live metrics stream
```

The `stats` command polls the Prometheus endpoint and prints samples ingested, queue depth, and WAL size at the interval you choose—ideal for live demos or war rooms.

---

## 5. Default Edge Runtime: Industrial Strength Out of the Box

**What it is:** `EdgeRuntime` (`pkg/aegisflow/edge.go`) wires the production-ready OPC UA collector, file WAL, in-memory queue, transformer hook, and Timescale sink.

**Why it matters:** You get guaranteed delivery, WAL replay, and Prometheus metrics the moment you type `go run ./cmd/aegis-edge`.

**How to customize:** pass `EdgeRuntimeOption` values:

```go
rt, _ := aegisflow.NewEdgeRuntime(
    cfg,
    aegisflow.WithCollector(mqttCollector),
    aegisflow.WithSink(customSink),
    aegisflow.WithTransformer(customTransformer),
)
```

---

## 6. Sink Adapters: Bridging to Unknown Databases

When your destination database or API is undecided, use the lightweight adapters in `pkg/aegisflow/sink_adapters.go`.

### Callback Sink

```go
printer := aegisflow.NewCallbackSink("stdout", func(batch []aegisflow.Sample) error {
    for _, s := range batch {
        fmt.Printf("%s %s => %+v\n", s.Timestamp, s.SensorID, s.Values)
    }
    return nil
})

flow.Run(ctx, aegisflow.StreamOutSink(printer))
```

### Channel Sink

```go
chanSink, batches, closeFn := aegisflow.NewChannelSink("fanout", 128)
defer closeFn()

go func() {
    for batch := range batches {
        forwardToFutureDB(batch)
    }
}()

flow.Run(ctx, aegisflow.StreamOutSink(chanSink))
```

Mermaid view:

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': {'background': 'transparent', 'primaryColor': '#f6f8fa', 'primaryBorderColor': '#57606a', 'primaryTextColor': '#24292f', 'lineColor': '#57606a', 'secondaryColor': '#d0d7de'}}}%%
flowchart LR
    Queue["Bounded Queue"] --> ChannelSink["Channel Sink"]
    ChannelSink --> WorkerA["Worker A"]
    ChannelSink --> WorkerB["Worker B"]
```

---

## 7. External Publisher: Bring Your Own Data Source

**What it is:** `ExternalPublisher` (`pkg/aegisflow/external.go`) exposes the WAL → queue → sink durability to *your* producers, even if they are not OPC UA.

```go
pub, _ := aegisflow.NewExternalPublisher(&aegisflow.ExternalPublisherConfig{
    Policy: cfg.Policy,
    WAL:    cfg.WAL,
}, func(batch []aegisflow.Sample) error {
    return sendToKafka(batch)
})

_ = pub.Publish(aegisflow.Sample{
    SensorID:  "custom",
    Timestamp: time.Now(),
    Values:    map[string]float64{"value": 42},
})
```

Use this when you already have a collector but still want WAL durability and backpressure.

---

## 8. Observability & Health

**Metrics:** Every runtime exposes `/metrics` and `/healthz` (see `pkg/aegisflow/edge.go:139-188`). Counters include `aegis_samples_ingested_total`, queue length, WAL size, and ingest latency.

**Custom instrumentation:** Use `StreamInObservability` / `StreamOutObservability` to inject OpenTelemetry or your own logging layer.

```go
flow.StreamIN(
    aegisflow.StreamInObservability(myObs),
).StreamOUT(
    aegisflow.StreamOutObservability(myObs),
)
```

IELTS tip: always mention evidence—tell stakeholders, “Check `/metrics` for `aegis_queue_length` to confirm backpressure behaviour.”

---

## 9. Disaster Readiness: Policies, WAL Replay, DLQ

*Policies:* configure `policy.on_queue_full` / `on_wal_full` to `block`, `drop`, or `reject`.

*Replay:* `replayWALIntoQueue` ensures that after a crash, every uncommitted entry re-enters the queue before new data flows.

*DLQ Hook:* Transformers can return an error; samples then land in the observability DLQ via `RecordDLQ`.

This triad lets you state, “Even if power fails mid-burst, AegisFlow reloads the WAL and the queue resumes without data loss.”

---

## 10. Hands-On Examples

Browse [`example/`](../example/README.md) for runnable scenarios:

1. **Basic** – OPC UA → Timescale (`go run ./example/basic`)
2. **Callback** – OPC UA → custom callback → unknown DB
3. **Channel** – OPC UA → channel sink → multiple workers

Each example is paired with a Mermaid diagram so you can see the architecture before running it.

---

## 11. Next Steps

- Swap the collector with MQTT, Modbus, or file replayers by implementing `aegisflow.Collector`.
- Write a custom `Sink` when your target DB stabilises—use the callback sink as scaffolding.
- Extend observability with `StreamOutObservability` to plug into OpenTelemetry.
- Contribute transformers, DLQs, or config hot-reloaders following the guidelines in `README.md`.

Whenever you introduce AegisFlow to teammates or customers, summarise it like this:

> “Configure once, reuse everywhere: OPC UA feeds a durable WAL, the queue enforces policy, and the sink is whatever database or service we need today—or tomorrow.”

That single sentence keeps everyone aligned with the architecture you just explored.
